As humans,
we are designed with the ability
to imitate what we see and hear.
For example,
we learn to talk by imitating
the language and accent of our parents.
And as we grew up,
we probably also adopted the attitudes
and actions of people we associated with.
Clearly, the example of others
can have a powerful influence on us.
Today, more than ever,
we need to copy good examples of faith.
Why?
Because we are living in a time
when our faith will be tested in many ways.
But note what we will have to do.
I invite you, please,
to turn with me to the book of Jude,
and follow along as we read
verse 20 in the book of Jude.
It says: “But you, beloved ones,
“build yourselves up on your most holy faith,
and pray with holy spirit.”
To help understand this verse,
think of what a homeowner might do
if he knows
a really bad storm is approaching.
Likely, he will take steps to build up,
or strengthen, his home
—from repairing cracks in the foundation
to reinforcing the doors, walls, and windows.
Well, in a similar manner,
you and I must take steps to build up,
or strengthen, our faith
so that we can protect ourselves
against the onslaught of tests
and trials we are likely to face.
You notice, Jude said that we must
continue ‘building ourselves up
on our most holy faith,’
which are the Christian teachings
found in God’s Word.
And as we study God’s Word
and pray for his help,
we can gain strength
by learning from the examples set
by different Bible characters.
There is so much that can be learned
from the examples of those in ancient times.
Each talk of this symposium
will highlight ways
in which we can imitate the faith
of Jehovah’s loyal servants of the past
and reject the course of faithless ones.
Let’s start by examining the example of Abel.
He was one of the first humans,
the fourth, in fact, to exist on earth.
The Bible describes Abel as a righteous man.
He built up a record
of living according to Jehovah’s standards,
but his family, however, did not.
We are well familiar with his parents,
Adam and Eve.
They both rebelled against Jehovah.
And his older brother, Cain,
well, he was not a positive role model.
The Bible described Cain
as one whose “own works were wicked.”
So you think about that:
When you look at Adam, Eve, and Cain,
who all displayed a lack of faith in Jehovah,
can you imagine what that family dynamic
must have been like for faithful Abel?
The tension, hostility,
resentment, lack of spiritual discussions
—do you think Abel’s faith was tested?
Indeed, it was.
And today, our faith may
likewise be tested by the actions
of those who choose not to serve Jehovah.
We invite you
to watch the following reenactment.
As you do,
note how a sister’s faith is tested.
I arrived in a new city
during the rainy season.
It rained all day every day
for a whole month.
At that time,
there were only three publishers there.
The first sister I met
was my new pioneer partner.
At first,
I felt as if the people in this territory
spoke a different language.
When I tried to talk to some people
about the Bible, they did not like it
and some were even afraid of these new ideas.
When government officials
noticed that we had shared
some tracts with the people,
they began to watch us
and followed us for about three months.
I felt overwhelmed by all of this
and became very anxious.
I had few return visits
or opportunities to speak about Jehovah.
I felt lost.
I didn’t know what to do or where to go.
I often wondered,
‘Father, why did you send me here?’
It was like I had gone
from being on a mountain peak
to the bottom of a deep valley.
As our sister adjusted
to her new circumstances,
did you note how her trials made her feel?
Anxious, lost, and overwhelmed.
Perhaps you’ve experienced similar feelings
when dealing with tests of your faith.
So how can Abel’s
example of faith help you and me?
Let’s notice what he did.
Turn with me, please, to the book of Hebrews,
and we’re going to read Hebrews chapter 11
and verse 4.
There we read:
“By faith Abel offered God
“a sacrifice of greater worth
than that of Cain,
“and through that faith
“he received the witness
that he was righteous,
“for God approved his gifts,
and although he died,
he still speaks through his faith.”
Abel built strong faith in Jehovah,
even though those around him failed to do so.
Let’s consider three steps that he took.
First:
Abel took time to ponder spiritual matters.
For instance,
he no doubt discerned
Jehovah’s love and wisdom in creation.
As a shepherd, perhaps he looked
at his sheep and recognized
that they needed someone
to guide and protect them.
And Abel likely discerned that as humans,
we too need someone to guide and protect us
—someone far wiser
and more powerful than any human.
The second step:
Abel prayed and acted on what he learned.
Even though his knowledge was limited,
it was enough
—enough for him to act in faith.
No doubt Abel appealed to Jehovah
in prayer to accept his sacrifice,
and Jehovah approved his gift.
Abel demonstrated his faith so powerfully.
Did you note in verse 4, it tells us
that his example still “speaks” to us today?
At times, we may feel that we
don’t have enough knowledge or experience
to demonstrate faith like Abel.
But that’s OK.
It doesn’t have to be an obstacle.
Pray to Jehovah, and make the most
of the knowledge that you do have.
Act in faith, and Jehovah will help you.
The third step:
Abel remained steadfast when under trial.
He didn’t let the actions
of his family affect his faith,
and we can’t let the actions
of others affect ours.
We must never allow something
that another person says or does
to make us feel ashamed
of being one of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
So be ready.
Be quick to identify yourself
as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
It will help to build and fortify your faith.
We can also learn
from the bad example set by Cain.
At Genesis 4:6, 7,
Jehovah warns Cain about his attitude,
and he urges him to turn to doing good.
But just like his faithless parents,
Cain determined that he
knew what was best for himself,
and his actions
led to the murder of his brother.
We may go through situations where,
because of imperfection,
we don’t always use the best judgment
or it causes us
to develop a negative attitude.
But when the matter
is brought to our attention,
how will we respond?
You see, let’s not imitate
the faithless example of Cain.
Let’s not feel
that we always know what’s best.
But let’s see that warning
as a loving tap on the shoulder
from our heavenly Father
and allow it to readjust our thinking
so that we can build our faith
and preserve our relationship with him.
Well, let’s now go back to our sister.
In the following reenactment,
note how she imitates Abel’s faith.
I studied the Bible
to see how Jehovah
cared for his servants in the past.
For example,
I read how Jehovah
told Jacob throughout his life:
‘I will be with you wherever you go.’
I pictured Jehovah
telling me the same thing:
‘Don’t worry.
Just go,
and I will always be there to help you.’
I begged him to help me
to be balanced, to feel peace,
and to have courage
to go out in the ministry.
One day, Jehovah helped me
to find a very good Bible student.
It was an absolutely wonderful
and unexpected gift from Jehovah.
Our small group joins
congregation meetings through the Internet.
This arrangement is a valuable source
of spiritual food for me.
We get together for meals
and association as well.
The experiences on JW Broadcasting®
make me feel that I am not alone.
And I always smile
and wave goodbye at the end.
It’s wonderful to be here.
Did you notice how our sister
built up her faith in Jehovah?
She imitated Abel’s example,
and she followed those steps.
The first step:
She pondered on spiritual matters.
She studied the Bible to see how Jehovah
cared for his servants in the past,
and then she applied
what she learned to her situation.
Then, the second step:
She prayed and acted on what she learned.
Her prayer was that Jehovah help her
to be balanced, to feel peace,
and to have courage to go into the ministry.
And then she acted in faith.
And despite the challenges in the ministry,
she took the third step:
She remained steadfast under trial.
She persevered and was blessed with a study.
And then she reinforced her faith
by joining in congregation meetings
and benefiting from the wholesome
association of the brotherhood.
And what was the result?
Jehovah blessed her efforts.
If you and I follow these steps,
he will bless our efforts as well.
By utilizing this tremendous gift
Jehovah has given us
—the power of example—
you and I can imitate Abel.
And as we build and fortify our faith,
we will weather any storm of adversity
that comes our way.
Brother Gary Breaux,
a helper to the Service Committee,
will now present
the next talk of this symposium,
“Imitate the Faithful, Not the Faithless
—Enoch, Not Lamech.”